Diplomacy with the elves

-Elves like trees, plants and animals. If you get to ‘allied’ reputation with the elves, wild animals (including treants) won’t be hostile towards you at all (though they will still retaliate if you attack them). In winter, wild animals coming towards your town will be labelled as your ally and they will only be hostile/drawn towards other groups like outlaws.

Warning 1: You can only do a mission from a single faction at a time, though you can abort the mission any time you want.

Warning 2: Some other factions like outlaws, orcs, undead and Especially saurians (remember how the elves razed the saurian capital during the ‘Legend of Wesmere’ campaign?) will have missions that include killing elves (the dwarves will only ask you to cut some trees to piss the elves off, and you can negotiate with the elvish messenger when the elf raiding party attack so that you won’t have to kill any elves) and once you kill Any elves, it will make getting to ‘allied’ reputation with the elves impossible. Furthermore, completing any mission from the orcs, outlaws, undead and saurians will permanently set your relation with the elves to ‘hostile’ (elf raiding parties will spawn henceforth with qualities depending on how many trees you cut), though you can placate the elves by paying them 300 gold yearly at the start of spring (there will be a dialog between you and advisor about this).

Warning 3: After getting to ‘allied’ reputation with the elves, cutting down trees will be a bit more complicated. You will be given permission to cut down 3 trees each year and you have to plant 3 trees somewhere else if you want to cut another 3 trees again that year. This also means that you can cut 3 trees per year and wait ‘til next year to cut some more without planting anything (this is to counter the mechanic to have trees grow randomly each year thus getting to the point that there are no longer any space to plant trees -> making it difficult for you to play)

Dialog for warning 3:
Tutorial: You have not yet replant enough trees. It is not wise to test the elves’ patience.
Worker: My lord, for some reasons, I feel like someone is watching me...
The shadow of an elvish avenger’s: ...

-If you have killed elves and have not completed any mission from the orcs, outlaws, undead or saurians, your relation with the elves will be set to ‘cold’

If your relation with the elves is ‘neutral’ or ‘cold’
When you first initiate diplomacy with the elves, you pay 500 gold and the following dialog occurs:
Advisor: Those are quite the exotic gifts, my lord. Have you decided on a potential ally?
Hero: Indeed. Mage, prepare connections with the elvish ambassador.
Silver mage: As you wish, my lord.
Tutorial: A bright glow emits from the staff of the mage, lighting up the luxurious room that was built specifically to communicate with the representatives of different races.
If this is the first time you do a diplomacy action
Tutorial: You wait with baited breath, knowing that the history of your town will be determined by your actions.
Tutorial: Its allies, as well as its enemies, are yours to decide.
If this is not the first time you do a diplomacy action
Tutorial: No matter how many times you witness this scene, a sense of unease and responsibility still weigh over your shoulder.
Tutorial: The prosperity of your town, as well as the allies that will come to its aid, depends on your actions.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette (a regular image of an elvish shyde, but blurry and blue): Greetings, human lord. The elves have heard of your hospitality, and I am here to listen to your offer of friendship.
Hero: I thank you for answering our call, my lady. Elves and humans have long been cordial with one another, ever since the great king Haldric was granted the right to build his kingdom from the Council of the Elven Lords. Today, I wish to once again display my people’s sincerity and further strengthen the bond between our kingdoms.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Your words are poetic, young lord, yet you seem to have forgotten about how your people broke the treaty, time and time again…
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: sigh And yet, it is no secret that the actions of those who live so short can’t be comprehended, just like how an oak will not understand the actions of the grasshopper swarm.
Cynic: whisper This entire conversation makes me feel glad that I was a soldier, not a noble.
Hero: The actions of the few can’t represent the will of the kingdom, my lady. However, if there is a way to gain your trust and redeem ourselves, I would be glad to hear.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Very well, young lord. There are many enemies of the forest, yet your actions might prove that your people aren't one of them...
Tutorial: You can now do missions that improve your relation with the elves. Keep in mind that you can only do a mission from a single faction at a time, though you can abort the mission whenever you want.

After this, whenever you contact the elves from a library again, a simple window will pop up with 3 options: ‘Current relation’, ‘Mission’ and ‘Call for help’. Clicking ‘Call for help’ allows you to recruit elvish mercenaries or summon a group of veteran elves from the west (if you have completed enough missions).

If your relation with the elves is ‘hostile’
Advisor: I’m sorry, my lord. The elvish ambassador refused to answer our call...

Missions:
-First mission: plant 25 trees; Reward: better trade deal with the elves
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Young lord, the land that was given to your people was once looked after by my ancestors.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: My people would never give up a single branch of our sacred glade, yet we are not so greedy as to lay claim to every tree in the forest. When we gave your first king the right to rule over the plain, we chose the plot of land where humans could thrive and prosper.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: However, it pained us to see how your people continue to exploit wildlife without giving anything back to it...
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Your actions speak louder than your words, young lord. Rebuild the forest that was given to you and prove that you are worthy of our friendship.
Tutorial: To improve your relation with the elves, you need to build 20 trees. Each normal tree counts as 1 tree while a rare ancient tree counts as 5 trees. You can check your progress by clicking on ‘Mission’ when talking to the elvish ambassador again.
-Once completed, choose ‘Mission’ again.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: I can see that you are wise beyond your years, young lord. It seems that there is yet hope for your people.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: The forest thank you, and so am I.
If you have never killed any elves
Tutorial: The elves appreciate your actions. Trading caravans that go to the western side of the map will be able to bring in more profit from now on.
If you have killed elves before
Tutorial: The elves accept your apology. Trading caravans that go to the western side of the map will be able to bring in more profit from now on.

-Second mission: kill 5 outlaw leaders; Reward: the ability to recruit lv1 elvish units
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: I ask you this, young lord. We elves rarely wander outside our forest, yet why do outsiders keep on trespassing our land?
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Strangely enough, most of them happen to be the people of your kingdom...
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: I shall overlook the faults of your woodcutters, hunters and the like. Yet there are those whose sins must not be tolerated.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Fow now, I want you to focus on the criminals of your kingdom, the outlaws.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Capture a few leaders of any band of outlaws. My aide shall come to collect them once you succeed.
Hero: May I ask of what will become of them, my lady?
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: I have my reasons, young lord. You need not concern yourself with them…
Cynic: quitely Her tone turned rather cold back there. Is there more to this matter than we thought?
Tutorial: You have been tasked with capturing a few outlaw leaders, they are the strongest unit of any outlaw raiding band (the one with a crown symbol). After dealing with 5 of them, the mission will be completed. You can check your progress by clicking on ‘Mission’ when talking to the elvish ambassador again.

when you kill the first outlaw leader
Unit delivering the blow: End of the line, criminal scum. You’re coming with us.
Outlaw leader: spitting on the ground What do you want? Putting me in jail until I die of boredom? laugh Good luck with that, dogs of the crown!!!
Unit: None of such. The elves will deal with you later.
Outlaw leader: Elves? Why would you… No… NO!!! Kill me now, dogs!!!
Unit: knock the outlaw unconscious Take him away, lads.
when you kill the second outlaw leader
Outlaw leader:panting heavily So the house dogs are now working with the forest hounds…
Outlaw leader: grimace One day, we will make sure you regret this decision...
Unit delivering the blow: Strange. The band of outlaws this fellow controls has no connection with the previous one, yet he has already heard about our deal with the elves.
Fool: Perhaps a survivor that clashed with us managed to escape and spread the news?
Advisor: They shouldn’t be able to confirm it that quickly...
when you kill the third outlaw leader
Tutorial: Before you could capture the outlaw leader, he has already taken out a hidden knife. With a grim and determined expression, he ends his own life.
Unit delivering the blow: Curses!!!
when you kill the fourth outlaw leader
Unit delivering the blow: Quickly! Capture him before-
Tutorial: Like the previous one, the outlaw leader quickly takes out a knife and ends his own life.
Unit: Damn it!!!
when you kill the fifth outlaw leader
Tutorial: The soldiers move quickly, restricting the bandit’s arms and pinning him to the ground.
Unit delivering the final blow: Finally… You are coming with us, scum!
Tutorial: Suddenly, black smoke rises from beneath, forming sinister lumps of floating masses.
Tutorial: Everyone was distracted. No one notices when a man covered with a black cloak appears, plunging his glowing knife into the outlaw leader’s heart.
Tutorial: Outraged, the guards surround the assassin, determined not to let him escape. However, the man in black easily slips past them with lighting dexterity, leaving behind the black smoke to deter any pursuers.
Tutorial: These balls of darkness nimbly avoid any sword or arrow that comes their way, moving around the guards as if they weren’t there. Every time the black smoke is obliterated by a mage, another one would rise out of the fleeing assassin.
Tutorial: Out of desperation, the remaining guards try to cut off the possible escape routes. The assassin then lunges towards the direction of the forest, dodging any attack the entire time.
Tutorial: You grin, knowing that his speed will soon drop, allowing your horsemen to catch up and surround him. Even if he manages to evade your pursuit, the arrows from elven sentries will certainly pierce him without fail.
Tutorial: However, the moment the assassin reaches the wood, his entire body seemingly vanishes into thin air, leaving you and the soldiers in shock...
-Once completed, choose ‘Mission’ again.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: I have heard about your accomplishments, young lord. These pests are trickier to deal with than I thought.
Elvish aide (an outrider): We shall take over from here. You have our thanks, human lord.
Hero: We are happy to help. Travel safely, friend.
Tutorial: Many elvish mercenaries have heard of your exploits. You can now recruit lv1 elvish units from the ‘Call for help’ option whenever you talk to the elvish ambassador. These elite units can move unhindered through the forest, catching and shooting down anyone that fails to escape the thick wood. However, keep in mind that mercenaries won’t be able to become loyal units.
Fool: Are we really going to ignore what just happened...

Third mission: kill 20 enemies from undead raiding parties (including necromancer, dark adept, zombie, ghost, skeleton and ghoul); Reward: the ability to recruit lv2 elvish units
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: You have done well thus far, young lord. Your dedication will not go unnoticed.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: This time, I would like you to strike at the hated enemy of the living: the undead itself!
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: These villains have been getting bolder each year, and the wildlife suffers as a result...
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Sooner or later, some of these fools will undoubtedly turn their attention towards your town. Bring me proof of your victories against their dark horde and prove that you are a friend of the forest!
Tutorial: You have been tasked with killing some undead. After slaying 20 units of the undead faction, the mission will be completed. You can check your progress by clicking on ‘Mission’ when talking to the elvish ambassador again.
-Once completed, choose ‘Mission’ again.
Tutorial: Various swords, staffs and shields engraved with sinister symbols lay scattered on the floor. Opposite you, the elvish shyde smiles gently.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: You have done well, young lord. The forest will be able to sleep easier at night, knowing that a friend will watch over their rest.
Tutorial: Your deeds are renowned throughout the elvish kingdom, attracting many adventurous veterans to your town. You can now recruit lv2 elvish units from the ‘Call for help’ option whenever you talk to the elvish ambassador, though they won’t be able to become loyal units.

Final mission: kill 20 enemies from orc raiding parties (including orc, gobblin and troll); Reward: the ability call for a group of veteran elvish reinforcement with 100 gold
If you have never killed any elves
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: The elves have seen your sincerity, young lord. Now I only have one final task to entrust you with.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: The nature of races who could only witness a few dozen moons in their lifetime changes as fast as the wind. Some for the better, some for the worse...
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Your actions have proven that your people are indeed worthy of the land granted by the Elven Council. So I must ask you to cut down the lives of those most hated by the forest.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: The orcs and their ilk have long been mortal enemies of us elves. They pillage and plunder the riches of our beloved glade just to satisfy their primal urges for carnage and destruction.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Once a raiding party of theirs descends upon your land, I want you to send out a message that even the barbaric mind of those brutes could understand.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Do this, and you shall earn our eternal gratitude.
-Once completed, choose ‘Mission’ again.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: smiles warmly Ever since I first laid my eyes upon you, I had already known that you are a shining example of your people.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: The trees may surrender to time, their branches wither as the seasons pass…
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Yet the deeds they witness shall never be forgotten, and so is their friend.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Whenever you need our help, warriors of the wood will answer your call.
Tutorial: Even in the deep heart of the forest, your deeds have reached the youngest of elves. Having witnessed your sincerity in earnest, countless elven warriors are eager to rush to your aid if ever required. You are now allied with the elves and can summon a group of veteran elves by paying 100 gold whenever talking to the elvish ambassador and choose ‘Call for help’. These warriors will arrive from the west of your town, so it’s best that you fill that area with trees in order to maximize their advantage.
Tutorial: The elves have also given you permission to cut down 3 trees each year. If you want to cut another 3 trees during the same year, you have to replant 3 trees first. This also means that you can cut 3 trees per year and wait until the next year to cut some more without planting anything.
Fool: licks lips I can’t wait to taste those fine elven wines our merchants could soon bring back!
If you have killed elves before
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: Regretfully, elven blood once stained your sword, young lord.
Elvish shyde’s silhouette: My people are not like humans who could forgive and forget so easily. We acknowledge you as a friend of the forest, but not of elves.
Tutorial: As you have killed elves from a raiding party, it is now impossible to reach an ‘allied’ relation with the elves.

Important notes:
-After you finnish the final mission, it will be much more complicated if you want to cut trees (look at warning 3 from the top of this section)
-You can’t cut trees while doing the missions of the elves.

Advisor: It might not be a good idea to cut trees while the elves are watching us, my lord.
Fool: Wait, who is watching us?
The shadow of an elvish avenger’s: ...
-If an elvish raiding party arrives due to you cutting some trees, the advisor will tell you that it’s possible to contact the elvish ambassador and negotiate a ceasefire (only possible if your relation is not ‘hostile’ with the elves)

After the usual dialog with the elvish raiding party (“...you declare war against the trees”)
Advisor: My lord, it might be best that we contact the elvish ambassador to avoid any unnecessary bloodshed between our people.
Advisor: The elves will undoubtedly demand some compensation as well. We should prepare at least 100 gold to calm their zeal.
Tutorial: You can pay 100 gold to settle your dispute with this band of elvish warriors. It might be best that you don’t anger them further, for elves rarely forget a grudge to their people.
Paying 100 gold will make the raiding party withdraw. If you refuse or don’t have enough gold, you will have to fight the elves

-You can summon a group of veteran warriors from several factions if you are allied with them. The elven warrior will come from the west of your town. You can also summon several groups of reinforcement from different sources at the same time. For example, paying 100 gold to call for help from the kingdom from the south and 100 gold to summon elvish warriors from the west.
